Documenting applications (#9)
IRL2/nanover: source/concepts/applications.rst

the suggestion is addressed. The Struct has the following keys:

* ``position`` is the suggested location of the center for the user's game
  space in the server space;
* ``rotation`` is a quaternion describing the rotation of the user's game
  space in the server space.

A client may not follow the server suggestion and should not be assumed to do
so. If the key is absent from the shared state, the client may locate itself in
the server space as it chooses.

.. warning::

   A client has no way of knowing if the user origin emanates from a ligitimate
   source (i.e. the server or a trusted client). Therefore, a client could use
   this feature to move users without their conscent. This could cause
   discomfort if not used responsibly.

As a summary, the user origin is specified as follow in the shared state:

.. code::

   user-origin.<PLAYER_ID>: {
     position,
     rotation,
   }

.. _play-space-description:

Play space
~~~~~~~~~~

A client can share the shape of its play space with the others. A play space,
or play area, is the area the user can safely reach. This is mostly relevant
for VR clients which have to define such a safe space.

> The play area is defined as four points, each as a vector of 3 XYZ values, in

Author: @Ragzouken I think I got the play space correct but it is very different from the rest so I would not mind you conforming this doc is right.

Reviewer: Seems right: we take the play area to be a rectangle, take the four corner positions and transform them into server space

A server can, optionally, implement the radial orient feature as a command on
the :ref:`command service <command-service>`. The radial orient command places
all the avatars on a circle around the origin of the server space by
setting a :ref:`user origin <user-origin-description>` for each avatar.

The command is named ``multiuser/radially-orient-origins``. It takes a
``radius`` argument that is the distance, in meters, between the generated
centers and the center of the server space. The default radius is 1 meter.
The command does not return anything. This leads to the following signature:

.. code::

   multiuser/radially-orient-origins(radius = 1.0) -> None

Let a set of players :math:`P = \{P_0, P_1, ... P_{N - 1}\}`, :math:`N` the number of
players, and :math:`r` the radius given in argument. Then the center's position
:math:`C_i` for avatar :math:`i` is computed using polar coordinates converted
to Cartesian. Each avatar is assigned an angle :math:`\theta_i`:

.. math::

  \theta_i = \frac{i \times 2 \pi}{N}

Then the positions is:

.. math::

  \begin{align}
  C_i &= \begin{bmatrix}
    r\cos{\theta_i}\\
    0\\
    r\sin{\theta_i}\\
  \end{bmatrix}
  \end{align}

> The rotation :math:`R_i` is expressed as a quaternion and is defined as:

Author: @Ragzouken do you remember how the rotation works in the radial orient command? I found the formula, but I do not see why it is this way. I guess part of it is there to rotate the space by 90°somehow?

Reviewer: The point is to rotate so that the z axis (forward) points inwards to the center. My diagram shows why a 90° turn makes sense. However, it looks like the signs of angles arent consistent and I'm not sure what to make of that.

![IMG_20240506_123358339~2](https://github.com/IRL2/nanover/assets/527158/0c44c212-5b27-41f6-81e3-b2ff9cf2144e)

"particles" to account for representations that do not deal with individual
atoms, such as coarse-grained models (`e.g.` `Martini <http://cgmartini.nl/>`_
or `SIRAH <http://www.sirahff.com/>`_). Particles are described by the following
keys in the array map:

* ``particle.positions``: the Cartesian coordinates of each particle. The
  coordinates are stored as a flat array of coordinates where each triplet
  corresponds to the XYZ coordinates of a particle.
* ``particle.velocities``: the velocity of each particle. Like the positions,
  they are expressed as a flattened array of triplets.
* ``particle.forces``: the force array applied to each particle, as a flattened
  array of triplets.
* ``particle.elements``: the chemical element for each particle expressed as
  atomic numbers. If a particle is not an atom, or if a chemical element is not
  relevant for any reason, the atomic number can be set to 0.
* ``particle.names``: a name for each particle. Each name is an arbitrary string
  to identify the particle, usually within a residue. If an atom does not have
  a name, set it to an empty string. When applicable, it is recommended to use
  the names used in the Protein Data Bank.

> .. warning::

Author: @hjstroud Does this warning cover your question from earlier about leap frog and velocities?

Reviewer 2: I think this is good! Maybe it's worth making clear that calculating the velocities are half a _time_ step out of sync? I've suggested a change below, what do you think?

   Many molecular dynamics integrators are based on the leap frog integration

>    method that calculates the velocities at the half step. Simulation engines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   method that calculates the velocities at the half time step (e.g. at time :math:`t + \frac{\Delta t}{2}`). Simulation engines
```
Could it ever be true that the velocities are calculated for half a tilmestep behind the data being reported? Should the + be a \pm above?

Author: There is a potential ambiguity here: the formula describing the integrator says $t + \frac{\Delta t}{2}$ because $t$ is the step you start from and $t + \Delta t$ is the step you calculate. However, the frame contains the frame that has been calculated already, so if $t$ is the time for the frame in the `FrameData`, then the velocity is at $t - \frac{\Delta t}{2}$.

Reviewer 2: Ah yes, I see, my mistake! So should the + in fact be a - in the suggestion?

Reviewer 2: Or alternatively, should the example be abandoned?

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Is this any better? For me it feels sensible to clarify what half step means as unambiguously as possible.
```suggestion
   method that calculates the velocities at the half step (i.e. half a time step out of sync with the positions). Simulation engines
```

  argument and returns nothing. If the client does not provide an index,
  provides a misformatted index, or provides an invalid index, the command is
  ignored silently. The bahaviour in case the index is valid but the system
  could not be loaded is undefined.
* ``playback/next() -> None``: if the server allows switching between molecular
  systems, this command requests the simulation with the next index to be
  loaded as the current simulation. The server is free to cycle through the
  available systems or ignore the command when the current system is the last
  available one. The behaviour when the system fails to load is undefined.

.. note::

   There is no command defined to toggle between playing and pausing the frame
   generation. This is on purpose as such a toggle command would be prone to
   race conditions when multiple clients call play/pause commands close to each
   other in time.

.. warning::

   The playback commands do not define any error handling. The commands to
   switch among molecular systems can be silently ignored and a failure to load
   a system, which is a probable event, has no defined behaviour.

> Simulation box for multi user use cases

Author: @Ragzouken @mcsloy Could you have a look at this section of the doc? I think it is all correct but is it sufficient for somebody who would want to implement the `scene` key?

Especially, can I skip that we apply the rotation to the `Simulation Space` node that contains the `Right Handed Space` one? I did not mention it as I see that as an implementation detail, but I expect that it could affect how the rotation is applied.

Also, I need to check the default rotation and what happens when we send invalid data.

Author: I tested quaternions values and `[0, 0, 0, 0]` and `[0, 0, 0, 1]` both work to set the box to its original position. I am not familiar enough with quaternion to know if they are different and if one is better than the other to be documented as the default value.

Author: After more testing:
* invalid values are treated as no value
* negative scale values are invalid

Reviewer: > I tested quaternions values and `[0, 0, 0, 0]` and `[0, 0, 0, 1]` both work to set the box to its original position. I am not familiar enough with quaternion to know if they are different and if one is better than the other to be documented as the default value.

`[0, 0, 0, 0]` is the 0 element of quaternions and shouldn't be used. `[0, 0, 0, 1]` is the identity element and a unit quaternion, so that should be considered the default.

Reviewer: As for right-handedness etc, I think it's fine as is and difficult to explain further. If it needs more then probably we ought to be more explicit about handedness in the implementation on the IMD side first anyway.

  (`i.e.` the position is ``[0, 0, 0]``);
* the Y and Z axes of the simulation space match the Y and Z axis of the server
  space, respectivelly; the X axis of the simulation space is reversed compared
  to the one of the server space, so positive X values in simulation space
  correspond to negative X values in the server space. This corresponds to a
  ``[0, 0, 0, 1]`` quaternion.
* 1 nanometer in simulation space corresponds to 1 meter in server space
  (`i.e.` the scale is ``[1, 1, 1]``).

The default ``scene`` value is therefore ``[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1]``.

.. note::

   The server space is Y-up while the simulation space is Z-up. However, the
   default orientation of the box matches the XY axes of both space so clients
   are expected to represent the simulation Y-up. In cases where the up
   orientation of the simulation space is meaningful, the simulation space must
   be rotated by setting the ``scene`` key rather than by altering the default
   orientation.

.. warning::

   The scale can be set to any value but it must be set to 3 identical positive
   value for the simulation space to keep its aspect ratio and not be mirrored.

.. _imd-application:

> The iMD application

Author: @hjstroud could you have a look at this section, please? I would like you to see if it makes sense, but also if it matches the source code: https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-protocol/blob/main/python-libraries/nanover-core/src/nanover/imd/particle_interaction.py

Reviewer 2: I have added some initial comments and suggestions (see below), I hope these are useful! I will compare with the source code now and let you know if I find anything else.

   default orientation of the box matches the XY axes of both space so clients
   are expected to represent the simulation Y-up. In cases where the up
   orientation of the simulation space is meaningful, the simulation space must
   be rotated by setting the ``scene`` key rather than by altering the default
   orientation.

.. warning::

   The scale can be set to any value but it must be set to 3 identical
   values for the simulation space to keep its aspect ratio.

The ``scene`` key is likely to be modified often and by multiple users. To
avoid conflict, users should :ref:`lock <state-lock-description>` the key
before updating it.

.. _imd-application:

The iMD application
-------------------

For now, the main application of NanoVer is interactive molecular dynamics
simulations (iMD). A simulation runs on the server and users can apply forces
to particles on-the-fly.

The iMD application defines how to send user interactions to the server, the
expected behaviour of the server regarding these interactions, and how the
server can communicate the result of these interactions on the simulation to
the clients.

> The application assumes it is used in conjunction with the :ref:`tracectory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The application assumes it is used in conjunction with the :ref:`trajectory
```

application <trajectory-application>` or a similar enough application to share
the simulation itself.

> A user send an interaction as a point of origin, the particles to which it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A user sends an interaction as a point of origin, the particles to which it
```

applies and a set of parameters. The server, then collects all the user

> interactions, compute the corresponding forces and propagate them with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interactions, computes the corresponding forces and propagates them with the
```

other forces in the simulation.

The interactions can use different :ref:`equations <force-equations>` to
compute the force :math:`F_{\text{COM}}` to the center of mass of the group of

> target particles. The force is then distributed to each particles differently

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
target particles. The force is then distributed among the particles differently
```

> is the interaction is mass weighted of not. If if it mass weighted, then the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the method of force distribution depends on whether 
the interaction is mass weighted of not. If if it mass weighted, then the
```

force :math:`F_i` applied to the particle :math:`i` is :math:`F_i = s \cdot m_i
\frac{F_{\text{COM}}}{N}` with :math:`s` a scaling factor set by the user,
:math:`m_i` the mass of particle :math:`i`, and :math:`N` the number of target
particles for the interaction. If the interaction is not mass weighted, then
:math:`F_i = s \cdot \frac{F_{\text{COM}}}{N}`. Finally, :math:`|F_i|` can be
capped to a maximum value specified by the user to avoid applying too large
forces.

> Each interaction type also define the equation for the energy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each interaction type also defines the equation for the energy
```

interaction is :math:`E = \frac{E_{\text{COM}}}{N}\sum_{i=0}^{N}m_i`. For non
mass weighted :math:`E = E_{\text{COM}}`.

.. _force-equations:

Force equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each server is free to implement the interaction equation they choose. However,
there are some that are commonly implemented: the Gaussian force, the harmonic
force, and the constant force. They all depend on the vector :math:`\mathbf{d}` between
the origin of the interaction, :math:`\mathbf{r}_{\text{user}}`, and the center of mass
of the set of target particles :math:`\mathbf{r}_{\text{COM}}`. So, :math:`\mathbf{d} =
\mathbf{r}_{\text{user}} - \mathbf{r}_{\text{COM}}`.

The Gaussian force is defined by:

.. math::

   \begin{align}
      \mathbf{F}_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Gaussian}} &= -\frac{\mathbf{d}}{\sigma^2}\exp{-\frac{| \mathbf{d} | ^2}{2\sigma^2}} \\
      E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Gaussian}} &= \exp{-\frac{| \mathbf{d} |^2}{2\sigma^2}}
   \end{align}

with :math:`\sigma = 1`. With this force, the user interaction is stronger when
applied close to the particles.

The harmonic force is defined by:

.. math::

   \begin{align}
   \mathbf{F}_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Harmonic}} &= -k \mathbf{d} \\

>    E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Harmonic}} &= \frac{1}{2}k| \mathbf{d} |^2

Reviewer 2: I believe that the energy of the user should be the _negative_ of the exponential defining the Gaussian force
```suggestion
   E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Harmonic}} &= - \frac{1}{2}k| \mathbf{d} |^2
```
as per the source code: https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-protocol/blob/main/python-libraries/nanover-core/src/nanover/imd/imd_force.py#L223

   \end{align}

with :math:`k = 2`.

The constant force is defined by:

.. math::

   \begin{align}
    F_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Constant}} &= 
    \begin{cases}
      (0, 0, 0),& \text{if } |d| = 0 \\
      \frac{d}{|d|},& \text{otherwise}
    \end{cases} \\
    E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Constant}} &= 
    \begin{cases}
      0,& \text{if } |d| = 0 \\
      1,& \text{otherwise}
    \end{cases}
   \end{align}

The direction of the constant force is undefined when the origin of the
interaction and the center of mass of the selection overlap, so the force is
not applied.

.. _velocity-reset:

Velocity reset
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Some server implementation can kill the momentum from ended user interactions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some server implementations can kill any residual momentum in the system due to the user-applied forces after the user interaction has ended
```

> by setting the velocity of the affected particles to 0. This is called velocity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by setting the velocities of the affected particles to 0. This is called velocity
```

by setting the ``imd.velocity_reset_available`` key to true in the :ref:`shared
state <state-service>`.

Sending user interactions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Users send, on the :ref:`shared state <state-service>`, the description of the
interactions they want to apply. There is no limit to the number of interaction
a user can send. Each interaction is described under the key
``interaction.<INTERACTION_ID>`` where ``<INTERACTION_ID>`` is an arbitrary
string, unique to the interaction, used to identify it. It is commonly a UUID4.
Under that key, the value is a Struct with the following keys:

* ``positions``: the coordinates of the interaction's origin in simulation
  space. This is typically a position attached to the controller of the user in
  VR, but it does not have to be. By default, this is `[0, 0, 0]`.
* ``particles``: the indices of the affected particles in the array of
  particles used by the :ref:`trajectory application <trajectory-application>`.
  If the order in this array does not match the order used by the simulation
  engine, it is the server's responsibility to map them. The default value is
  an empty list.

> * ``type``: the kind of interaction to apply, this is what defines what

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``type``: the type of interaction to apply, this is what defines what
```

  :ref:`force equation <force-equations>` will be used. It should be set to
  `gaussian` for the Gaussian force, `spring` for the harmonic force, and
  `constant` for the constant force. Interactions with an type unknown to the
  server will be ignored silently. By default, the Gaussian force is assumed.
* ``scale``: the scaling factor :math:`s` to apply to the force. The default
  scale is 1.
* ``mass_weighted``: a boolean, true if the interaction is mass weighted, false
  otherwise. The default is true.
* ``max_force``: the maximum force magnitude that can be applied to a particle
  by this interaction. The default is 20,000
  :math:`kJ\cdot\text{mol}^{-1}\cdot\text{nm}^{-1}`.
* ``reset_velocities``: a boolean, true if :ref:`velocity reset
  <velocity-reset>` should be applied, false otherwise. This is false by

>   default and will be ignored silently is the server does not have the feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  default and will be ignored silently if the server does not have the feature.
```

If the iMD application is used in conjunction with the :ref:`multiplayer
application <multiplayer-application>`, then the interaction can also use the
following fields:

* ``owner.id``: if the interaction originates from a client that defines an
  avatar, it can set this field to the player id attached to its avatar. This

>   allows to match interactions with avatars when analysing session recordings.

Reviewer 2: In this scenario, is it the server or the client that is matching the interactions with the avatars? It may be worth specifying, e.g. 
```suggestion
  allows the server to match interactions with avatars when analysing session recordings.
```
in the former scenario.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps `allows one to...`, unless this sounds too pretentious?

* ``label``: used with ``owner.id``, this is the name of the avatar component
  from which the interaction originates (`e.g.` ``hand.right`` or
  ``hand.left``).

.. _imd-framedata-keys:

FrameData keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some details about how the user interactions where applied can be added to the
:ref:`FrameData <frame-description>`.

> The sum of the energies from user interactions can be included, in

Reviewer 2: Is it worth specifying how the total energy is calculated, and warning them here (as well as elsewhere) that this corresponds to whatever the kinetic and potential energies output by the simulation engine which may correspond to different times in a given frame?

Author: I do not understand what yu mean by "which may correspond to different times in a given frame"

Reviewer 2: Ah I'm sorry for not explaining this well. I am referring to the difficulties with calculating total energies when using a leap-frog algorithm for integration such that the kinetic energy stored in a frame is half a time step behind the potential energy (with the velocities calculated as v(t - dt/2) and the positions calculated at r(t)) for a given frame

<https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/google.protobuf#google.protobuf.Struct>`_
under a key formatted as ``avatar.<PLAYER_ID>``.

Inside the Struct, an avatar refers to its player ID. It can also specify a
name and a color. The most important part of an avatar is the list of its
components. Components are elements of the avatar with a position and a rotation.

.. warning::

   The avatar specifies its player ID twice: in the top level key and with the
   ``playerid`` sub-key. Both places MUST match. A discrepency between the two
   is undefined behaviour. See `issue #98 in nanover-protocol
   <https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-protocol/issues/98>`_.

The name is an arbitrary string meant to be displayed to the other users as a
human-readable identifier. The color is also meant to be displayed to the other
users. The color is provided as a list of RGBA values between 0 and 1.

The expected components are the head and the two hands. An avatar can contain
other components, but they may not be supported by other clients. Each
component is a Struct with the following keys:

* ``name``, the predefined name of the component. The supported names are

>   "head", "hand.right", and "hand.left".

Author: ```suggestion
  "headset", "hand.right", and "hand.left".
```

capped to a maximum value specified by the user to avoid applying too large
forces.

Each interaction type also defines the equation for the energy associated with the user interaction
:math:`E_{\text{COM}}`. For mass weighted interaction, the energy for the
interaction is :math:`E = \frac{E_{\text{COM}}}{N}\sum_{i=0}^{N}m_i`. For non
mass weighted :math:`E = E_{\text{COM}}`.

.. _force-equations:

Force equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each server is free to implement the interaction equation they choose. However,
there are some that are commonly implemented: the Gaussian force, the harmonic
force, and the constant force. They all depend on the vector :math:`\mathbf{d}` between
the origin of the interaction, :math:`\mathbf{r}_{\text{user}}`, and the center of mass
of the set of target particles :math:`\mathbf{r}_{\text{COM}}`. So, :math:`\mathbf{d} =
\mathbf{r}_{\text{user}} - \mathbf{r}_{\text{COM}}`.

The Gaussian force is defined by:

.. math::

   \begin{align}
      \mathbf{F}_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Gaussian}} &= -\frac{\mathbf{d}}{\sigma^2}\exp{-\frac{| \mathbf{d} | ^2}{2\sigma^2}} \\

>       E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Gaussian}} &= \exp{-\frac{| \mathbf{d} |^2}{2\sigma^2}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Gaussian}} &= - \exp{-\frac{| \mathbf{d} |^2}{2\sigma^2}}
```

   \end{align}

with :math:`\sigma = 1`. With this force, the user interaction is stronger when
applied close to the particles.

The harmonic force is defined by:

.. math::

   \begin{align}
   \mathbf{F}_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Harmonic}} &= -k \mathbf{d} \\

>    E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Harmonic}} &= - \frac{1}{2}k| \mathbf{d} |^2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   E_{\text{COM}}^{\text{Harmonic}} &=  \frac{1}{2}k| \mathbf{d} |^2
```
